



Network Working Group                                        H. Birkholz
Internet-Draft                                            Fraunhofer SIT
Intended status: Informational                              Y. Deshpande
Expires: 1 June 2023                                                 ARM
                                                               D. Brooks
                                                                     REA
                                                               R. Martin
                                                                   MITRE
                                                               B. Knight
                                                               Microsoft
                                                        28 November 2022


          Detailed Software Supply Chain Uses Cases for SCITT
             draft-birkholz-scitt-software-use-cases-latest

Abstract

   This document includes a collection of representative Software Supply
   Chain Use Case Descriptions.  These use cases aim at identifying
   software supply chain problems that the industry faces today and acts
   as a guideline for developing a comprehensive solution for these
   class of scnenarios.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-birkholz-scitt-software-use-
   cases/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the SCITT Working Group
   mailing list (mailto:scitt@ietf.org), which is archived at
   https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/scitt/.  Subscribe at
   https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/scitt/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/ietf-scitt/draft-birkholz-scitt-software-supply-
   chain-use-cases.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 1 June 2023.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Terminology
   2.  Generic Problem Statement
   3.  Notational Implementation
   4.  Software Supply Chain Use Cases
     4.1.  Firmware Delivery to large set of constrained IoT Devices
       4.1.1.  Introduction
       4.1.2.  Personal Health Monitoring Systems
     4.2.  Software Integrator assembling a software product for a
           smart car
       4.2.1.  Assembly of a Components in a Smart Car
       4.2.2.  Software Problem Summary
   5.  Normative References
   Appendix A.  TODO List
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   Modern software applications are an intricate mix of first-party and
   third-party code, development practices and tools, deployment methods
   and infrastructure, and interfaces and protocols.  The software
   supply chain comprises all elements associated with an application's
   design, development, build, integration, deployment, and maintenance
   throughout its entire lifecycle.  The complexity of software coupled
   with a lack of lifecycle visibility increases the risks associated
   with system attack surface and the number of cyber threats capable of
   harmful impacts, such as exfiltration of data, disruption of
   operations, and loss of reputation, intellectual property, and
   financial assets.  There is a need for a platform architecture that
   will allow consumers to know that suppliers maintained appropriate
   security practices without requiring access to proprietary
   intellectual property.  SCITT-enabled products and analytics
   solutions will assist in managing compliance and assessing risk to
   help prevent and detect supply chain attacks across the entire
   software lifecycle while prioritizing data privacy.

1.1.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

2.  Generic Problem Statement

   Supply chain security is paramount to protecting critical
   infrastructure, aerospace, and defense and avoiding impacts on
   security, the economy, public health, and safety.  It has
   historically focused on risk management practices to safeguard
   logistics, meet compliance regulations, demand forecasts, and
   optimize inventory.  While these elements are foundational to a
   healthy supply chain, an integrated cyber security-based perspective
   of the software supply chains remains broadly undefined.  Recently,
   the global community has experienced numerous supply chain attacks by
   cybercriminals targeting weaknesses in software supply chains.  As
   illustrated in Figure 1, a software supply chain attack may leverage
   one or more lifecycle stages and directly or indirectly target the
   component.

   generic supply chain threats diagram here

                    Figure 1: Example Lifecycle Threats

   DevSecOps relies on third-party and open-source solutions, expanding
   supply chain complexity, and reducing the visibility of the lifecycle
   compliance.  One solution approach is to enhance the auditability and
   accountability of Digital Supply Chain Artifacts (DSCA) by using an
   interoperable, scalable, and flexible decentralized architecture with
   a transparent registry.  The required software artifacts are highly
   variable based on community policy requirements, and the solution
   approach should be artifact agnostic to enable adaptation to these
   broad policies.  Example artifacts may include commit signatures,
   build environment and parameters, software bill of materials, static
   and dynamic application security testing results, fuzz testing
   results, release approvals, deployment records, vulnerability scan
   results, and patch logs.

3.  Notational Implementation

   TBD

   deployment chain diagram here

       Figure 2: Deployment Example of SCITT in Software Development

4.  Software Supply Chain Use Cases

4.1.  Firmware Delivery to large set of constrained IoT Devices

4.1.1.  Introduction

   Firmware is ubiquitous.  It is in phone, watch, TV, alarm clock, baby
   monitor, WiFi devices and possibly even in light bulbs if one uses
   LED lamps.  In any given desktop or Personal Computer (PC) there is a
   BIOS or UEFI type firmware that people are familiar with, but there
   are also scores of other hidden firmware blobs running on small
   controllers which power things like managment engines, keyboards,
   network cards, hard disks, SSD's etc.

   Firmware is powerful, it runs in a highest previlege level possible
   and is often the bedrock on which the security story of the devices
   it powers.

4.1.2.  Personal Health Monitoring Systems

   Personal health monitoring devices, i.e., eHealth devices are
   typically battery driven and located physically on or under user
   control to monitor some bodily function, such as temperatire, blood
   pressure or pulse rate.  These devices typically connect to the
   Internet through an intermediary base statation, using wireless
   technologies.  This connection is used to report the monitored data
   and also to update the firmware on the health monitoring system.
   This public network and open distribution system produces its own
   security challenges.

   Today, the best-in-class firmware vendors who supply the firmware
   also provide an update framework, which verifies the integrity and
   authenticity of firmware updates before allowing them to be
   installed.

4.1.2.1.  Firmware Delivery Problem Summary

   Even with a robust firmware update system the following problems
   remain as given below:

   *  How does the client applying the firmware update on the system
      know, that the received firmware is not faulty or even malicious ?

   *  What if the signing identity used to assert the authenticity of
      the firmware is somehow used to sign unintended updates (whether
      through outright compromise as in the Realtek identity used to
      sign the Stuxnet worm)?

   *  How can one ascertain that the released firmare is not subverted
      or compromised due to an insider risk - be it malicious or
      otherwise ?

   *  How the publisher themselves even know that there deliverable has
      been compromised in some way, can they trust their key protection
      or audit logging ?

   *  How the update client on an instance of health monitoring system
      know that they have been given the same update as all other
      devices or one especially crafted for just a small subset of fleet
      of devices ?

4.2.  Software Integrator assembling a software product for a smart car

   ### Introduction

   Software Integration is a complex activity.  It essentially implies
   combining various different software components coming from a a range
   of suppliers and producing a combined executable to be given to a
   Device Manufacturer.  Then the executable is loaded into the device,
   as part of device assembly.

   The complexity adds a level of security vulnerability into the
   delivered software.

4.2.1.  Assembly of a Components in a Smart Car

   SoftAuto Ltd and Smart Cars Ltd are two different companies that
   source developed integrated software that can be loaded into
   autonmous vehicles they produce.  Both these companies, source
   integrated software solution from Micro Coding Wizard (MCW) a
   fictitious company that sells integrated software solutions that can
   be loaded into specific vehicle product.  MCW assembles the OS from
   Vendor OS-X that is built on top of Firmware released by Component
   Vendor-A and then integrates a package manager and some open source
   libraries to make the final software product.  The assembled software
   is loaded onto a car manufactured by Smart Cars Ltd. The car is been
   sold and is been actively used by Customer-Y.

4.2.2.  Software Problem Summary

   *  While the software is been running on the automated vehicle, a
      periodic vulnerability scanning software detects some known
      security issue with one of the component.  Customer-Y is prompted
      with a "Warning Indictor" on the dashboard.  As a result,
      Customer-Y reports the problem to Smart Cars Ltd.

   *  Smart Cars Ltd, while not very sure what could be the problem,
      under panic communicates to MCW and requests them to look into the
      problem.

   *  MCW does initial investigation and suspects that the binary
      received from Vendor OS-X has some problems.  It demands specific
      environment and architectural details associated with the built
      operating systems binary to ascertain that the software was
      produced without any tampering by the Vendor OS-X.

   *  Unfortunately there is no way for the integrator to know, if the
      binary was compromised, so the integrator is concerned they may
      have delivered malware unknowingly to their customers.

   *  Vendor OS-X attempts to show that it did all the steps correctly.
      It does disclose information about the binary they delivered.  In
      addition to this, they also demonstrated the build environment and
      the architecture, they used during the build.

   *  However there is no "Verifiable Proofs" of the statement made by
      Vendor OS-X.

   *  MCW, Smart Cars Ltd., and Customer-Y now has to trust without any
      means of verifying the claims made by Vendor OS-X.

   *  Vendor OS-X thinks there is some mistake on the part of MCW that
      has led to this situation.

   *  The deadlock continues, with no clear resolution.

   *  This eventually leads to loss of reputation and company closure
      for Vendor OS-X.

5.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

Appendix A.  TODO List

   *  Promotion Scenario: '3rd party lab validates the detail instead of
      their own test'

   *  Endorsement Scenario: Audit downstream independent of issuer and
      provide an endorsement

   *  CI/CD SCITT interaction - Create a model before talking to Github
      (Statements about SW could be listed.  Policy management can be
      done via SCITT through SW development lifecycle)

Authors' Addresses

   Henk Birkholz
   Fraunhofer Institute for Secure Information Technology
   Rheinstrasse 75
   64295 Darmstadt
   Germany
   Email: henk.birkholz@sit.fraunhofer.de


   Yogesh Deshpande
   ARM
   Email: yogesh.deshpande@arm.com


   Dick Brooks
   REA
   Email: dick@reliableenergyanalytics.com


   Robert Martin
   MITRE
   Email: ramartin@mitre.org


   Brian Knight
   Microsoft
   Email: brianknight@microsoft.com
